2/14/26, 11:30 AM

Axiom Transitive Closure - Eigenhector’s Substack

Axiom Transitive Closure
The joys of embodied philosophy
EIGENHECTOR
JAN 01, 2026

6

1

2

Share

Last night during New Years Eve I finally figured out my connection between jhanas
and the prajnaparamitas. The instructions for the first jhana is usually to have the
sensation of rapture (piti) utterly pervade experience. The prajnaparamitas for me a
have a similar sensation. You can see repeatedly in the Diamond Sutra verses like “For
all such beings produce a body of merit that has no limits, a body of merit that is
inconceivable and incomparable, immeasurable and boundless.” They have flavors like
Dana (generosity) or Kshanti (patience) but have a similar kind of experience for me
that feels like spin glass going from disordered to ordered as in the picture below.

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/axiom-transitive-closure

1/5

2/14/26, 11:30 AM

Axiom Transitive Closure - Eigenhector’s Substack

From Magnetic Properties of Perovskite Oxides.
So the generalization of the pervasion operator I realized was something I call Axiom
Transitive Closure. I call it an axiom because it is an unprovable metaphysics, so you
can just simply take it as an axiom and see what it feels like. Transitive closure is an
idea in graph theory or binary relations where if node A is related to node B and node
B is related to node C then node A is related to node C by transitivity.
Axiom Transitive Closure is then a way to utterly pervade the entire experience field
with something. Take something you like, such as piti (rature), dana (generosity), shri
(auspiciousness), Truth, Good, Awakeness and generate it somewhere in experience.
Next, just take Axiom Transitive Closure plus the assumption that any adjacent node
will be influenced by the awake / good / generous node. So the mind starts out like
figure (a), in a random disordered state. Then you look for a good sensation and then
assume Axiom Transitive Closure and the field of goodness rapidly spreads
https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/axiom-transitive-closure

2/5

2/14/26, 11:30 AM

Axiom Transitive Closure - Eigenhector’s Substack

throughout experience just by taking this Axiom of transitivity as well as another
assumption that if a node is awakened it will awaken all adjacent nodes. After a short
period of time the prajnaparamita should utterly pervade experience like (b).
Sometimes there is an oscillation like c which feels like form and emptiness
alternating. It seems like a good thing to just sit in state (b) for a while and just
marinade in the prajnaparamita. The marinade language comes from Rob Burbea.
In practice I have found Dana and Kshanti to be really useful. If I am in the checkout
counter or DMV, I just find a tiny bit of patience somewhere and by applying Axiom
Transitive Closure it becomes this orderly giant field of patience. Dana (generosity) is
an especially nice antidote to hungry ghosts vibes that seem to be present in crowded
spaces.
Anyway have a good start to 2026 and let me know if this mind tool was useful for you!
References
The Three Zen Sutras by Red Pine
6 Likes ∙ 2 Restacks

Discussion about this post

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/axiom-transitive-closure

3/5

2/14/26, 11:30 AM

Axiom Transitive Closure - Eigenhector’s Substack

Comments

Restacks

Write a comment...

Eigenhector Jan 1
Author

The key to unlocking Mahayana vibes for me is assuming you are in the "all such beings" set and treat
the text as a promise, that is to say take the good thing they mention as an axiom. So "all such beings
have unlimited body of merit" just be in the set of all such beings. Basically Vimalakirti, diamond and
lotus sutra are set up as maximally propagating and experienceable good vibes machines. So if you
change your mental stance from these are things to be attained to oh let me assume temporarily what
they say is true, then you can experience the text as a vibe machine. Mahayana texts also set the
activation threshold ridiculously low, like you just have to read one verse or explain it once or make a
grass doll to be in the set.
LIKE (2)

REPLY

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/axiom-transitive-closure

SHARE

4/5

2/14/26, 11:30 AM

Axiom Transitive Closure - Eigenhector’s Substack

© 2026 Eigenhector · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice
Substack is the home for great culture

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/axiom-transitive-closure

5/5

