2/14/26, 11:33 AM

Genius as the Oscillation of Verbal and Non-conceptual Cognition

Genius as the Oscillation of Verbal and Nonconceptual Cognition
Thoughts on the mechanics of how Inspiration works
EIGENHECTOR
FEB 05, 2026

3

1

Share

I have been experimenting with an oscillation of the left and right hemisphere
thinking using various practices that I call in Shaivism terms the Spanda (links to
books at the end).

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/genius-as-the-oscillation-of-verbal

1/10

2/14/26, 11:33 AM

Genius as the Oscillation of Verbal and Non-conceptual Cognition

Waves on a sea shore. You can think of the process as an oscillation between solid
thoughts and stories like land and the vast subconscious parallel processing mind as
the sea.

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/genius-as-the-oscillation-of-verbal

2/10

2/14/26, 11:33 AM

Genius as the Oscillation of Verbal and Non-conceptual Cognition

If you read the creation myths of various traditions, you quickly realize they are also
talking about this process of ideation, how ideas are created from the void. The
creation myths describe the process by which a human can access the Ideal to summon
ideas and art from the void back to the world of Form.
You can work with any duality in Form and then alternate into the world of Emptiness
and work with it there and then return it back to Form. I think the way it works is an
oscillation between Story and Light. In this world we think in terms of Stories and
Words. Sometimes the Stories are all tied up in knots and tangles like notions of self or
tricky Gordion knot mathematical problems that are interdependent (for me it was a
three way factorization of Zebra fish confocal microscopy sheet registration, time
series extraction and neuron location generation) and you have to untie these knots.
Rather than having the Story be re-written in the conceptual mind it is far better to
recast the problem as Light, solve it in the non-conceptual mind and then read it back
into a new Story. It works because the details of the Story remain unchanged, these are
the constraints like details you remember about your past or for a mathematical
problem, the facts of the matter. The Light phase of the thinking works on the unseen
parts of the problem, like stuff you have forgotten or are unaware of. So it’s like a
interpolating spline passing through control points, the control points are in the world
of Story but the curve is in the world of Light and can move around as long as they
pass through the control points. This allows the Light to seamlessly change Story
without contradiction.

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/genius-as-the-oscillation-of-verbal

3/10

2/14/26, 11:33 AM

Genius as the Oscillation of Verbal and Non-conceptual Cognition

Experience the interaction of fixed control points, the Story, and how they related to
each other, the Light. If we are talking about the Past, then the red dots are important
events in your Story. Then in the Light realm, it is how these events relate to one
another. In the problem domain the red dots in Story can be people for people
problems and the Light view is the relationship between the people. Notice that the

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/genius-as-the-oscillation-of-verbal

4/10

2/14/26, 11:33 AM

Genius as the Oscillation of Verbal and Non-conceptual Cognition

Light is able to process the square of the number of interactions between the people.
There will be a total of N * (N - 1) / 2 interactions of Light between N people in the
Story. This is beyond the capability of the conceptual Story mind to compute for large
enough N but not a problem for the Light mind.
So how does one access this mode of thinking? The way I do it is the microcosmic
orbit from Daoism or the Yukti 1 from Vijnana Bhairava Tantra. During the Form
phase of the practice, usually the full in breath, you can think about the Story. Then in
the Emptiness phase of the practice, usually the exhale, you can switch cognition to
the Light view. It will be the standard non-dual experience common to all non-dual
practices. Just pay attention to the Light. There is this ‘forgetting’ layer for a while
because it is very hard to process the Light simply because it has much higher memory
and processing power than the Story mode of mind we are usually in, so the mechanics
of Light mode will be lost simply because it is way more detailed and has square of the
number of interactions as Story mode. When you return back to Story mode look at
how it has changed, this is the Genius or Pratibha the insight you can use to think
about stuff. It’s probably a good skill to have in the AI era to rethink your past, or work
at a higher level cognition that is beyond any amount of token limit like strategic level
insights.
What’s the evidence I have for this mode of cognition? I offer several from mystical
texts.

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/genius-as-the-oscillation-of-verbal

5/10

2/14/26, 11:33 AM

Genius as the Oscillation of Verbal and Non-conceptual Cognition

The first is the Japa path of Mantra. When folks repeat mantra they go through four
levels of sound. Vaikhara vak for the spoken mantra, Madhyama vak for the next level
of subtlety maybe whisper or ideation, Pashyanti vak for the pre-verbal Light speech
and Para vak for the Void speech or when they are so far into the Light mode they
cannot even remember anything because the complexity level has exceeded the Story
mind’s ability to comprehend or remember. The reverse of Japa is then Pratibha or
Intuitive insight. The experience of As Above returning to So Below (in Hermetic
language). This is just the reversal of how the Ideal returns from Para to Pashyanti to
Madhyama to Vaikhara vak of the world of Form.
The second piece evidence I have comes from the Tree of Life from Kaballah. Top part
of Ain (void), Ain Soph (limitless void), Ain Soph Ohr (limitless radiance), Keter (crown.
reception of the light), Chochmah (wisdom, pre-verbal light processing), Binah
(understanding, the metaphor bridge interpreting the Light as symbols) and finally
Da’at (knowledge, the by-product of the cycle).

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/genius-as-the-oscillation-of-verbal

6/10

2/14/26, 11:33 AM

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/genius-as-the-oscillation-of-verbal

Genius as the Oscillation of Verbal and Non-conceptual Cognition

7/10

2/14/26, 11:33 AM

Genius as the Oscillation of Verbal and Non-conceptual Cognition

based on File:Kabbalistic Tree of Life (Sephiroth) 2.svg by AnonMoos CC BY SA -4.0
The third piece of evidence comes from the Dzogchen practice of Dang, Rolpa and
Tsal.
In terms of energy – there are three characteristic ways in which the energy
manifests – Dang, Rolpa, and rTsal (gDang, rol pa, and rTsal). Dang is the energy in
which ‘internal’ and ‘external’ are not divided from that which manifests. It is
symbolised by the crystal sphere which becomes the colour of whatever it is placed
upon. Rolpa is the energy which manifests internally as vision. It is symbolised by
the mirror. The image of the reflection always appears as if it is inside the mirror.
rTsal is externally manifested energy which radiates. It is symbolised by the
refractive capacity of the faceted crystal. For a realised being, this energy is
inseparable in its manifestation from the dimension of manifest reality. Dang,
Rolpa, and rTsal are not divided.
As you can see, Dang is the unmanifest Void, Rolpa is the Light transition and rTsal is
manifest or the appearance in the world of Story.
So we have three different mystic texts of three different traditions talking about the
same phenomenology. Once you spot the pattern you can see it everywhere, like in
Daoism’s creation story, in the breath etc. I highly recommend that folks investigate
this tool for better adaptation in these uncertain times.

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/genius-as-the-oscillation-of-verbal

8/10

2/14/26, 11:33 AM

Genius as the Oscillation of Verbal and Non-conceptual Cognition

References:
Secret of the Golden Flower - microcosmic orbit
Vijnana Bhairava Tantra Yukti 1
The Mystery of Vibrationless-Vibration in Kashmir Shaivism:: Vasugupta’s Spanda
Karika & Kshemaraja’s Spanda Sandoha
3 Likes

Discussion about this post
Comments

Restacks

Write a comment...

Eigenhector Feb 5
Author

Forgot to add one more technique https://deconstructingyourself.com/dropping-the-ultra-ball.html
LIKE

REPLY

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/genius-as-the-oscillation-of-verbal

SHARE

9/10

2/14/26, 11:33 AM

Genius as the Oscillation of Verbal and Non-conceptual Cognition

© 2026 Eigenhector · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice
Substack is the home for great culture

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/genius-as-the-oscillation-of-verbal

10/10

