2/14/26, 11:31 AM

How Prometheus stole Fire from the Devas

How Prometheus stole Fire from the Devas
Or at least how I think it works for myself
EIGENHECTOR
JAN 04, 2026

4

2

Share

Everyone knows Prometheus stole Fire from the Devas, but not many people explain
how. I will attempt to explain how it works for me in the interest of documenting the
process so other people have my words to explain the phenomenon.

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/how-prometheus-stole-fire-from-the

1/9

2/14/26, 11:31 AM

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/how-prometheus-stole-fire-from-the

How Prometheus stole Fire from the Devas

2/9

2/14/26, 11:31 AM

How Prometheus stole Fire from the Devas

By Heinrich Füger - [1][2], Public Domain,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=175869
When I was sent on a trip by just the phrase “Eka-Varna Śakti Vidyā” last night, I
carefully watched the process unfolding so that I could document the conceptual side
of the experience. I already had experience with this from Tibetan One Taste, but that
was too English for me. The mystical language of Sanskrit bypassed my normal
conceptual mind filters and just looked like an extension of the pervasion operator
mentioned in the post on Axiom Transitive Closure. The general gist of the
phenomenon is a mystic will say just a one liner to another mystic like “my experience
of the void is vivid” or “two mirrors facing each other outside of time” or Rumi’s

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/how-prometheus-stole-fire-from-the

3/9

2/14/26, 11:31 AM

How Prometheus stole Fire from the Devas

“Here’s the new rule: break the wineglass,
and fall toward the Glassblower’s breath.”
Any of these one liners will trigger an experience for a mystic. So I decided to
investigate the phenomenon.
Clearly language is a compression. So extending on the Pigeonhole Principle idea,
experience is compressed by language. So the interesting part is how language
decompresses into experience. How are mystics legible to one another using twilight
language? I can literally just walk up to a rando mystic of any tradition or even
pratyekas these days and understand most of them and they understand me. So this
must point to some back channel communication or shared unseen common
experience.
Drawing from dictionary based compression algorithms like Lempel-Ziv-Welch
language must expand into experience and the dictionary must be about the mapping
between words and experience. I suspect that a lot of correspondence tables in
astrology, herbology, chakras etc are about increasing the spanning space of each of
the keys in the dictionary to eventually end up at One Taste.
Suppose you just exist as a singleton human and your only correspondence is red is
bad because you fell and red stuff came out of your knee and it was painful. Then via
something like the Hebbian learning paradigm, neurons that fire together, wire

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/how-prometheus-stole-fire-from-the

4/9

2/14/26, 11:31 AM

How Prometheus stole Fire from the Devas

together, you get the associative map with the row {red, blood, pain}. Then the
singleton human joins society and that row expands to {red, blood, pain, lipstick, stop}.
Then the human joins an esoteric tradition and that row expands to {red, blood, pain,
lipstick, stop, magnetization, Deva of attraction (e.g. Sri Lalita / Kurukulle), red lady
from the matrix}. Notice how a Deva sneaked into the associative map. It is very nice
to have a Deva in at least one row in your experience, but if you have a wrathful one
there are other ways to work with that (see Sasha’s article) but I mostly work with Pure
Land Devas. So I think then once there is enough shared rows in the dictionary a
mystic is then able to just experience a shared phrase just because the rows contain
enough elements in common to allow the entanglement of this experience. I think it’s
called sudden or like a lightning bolt because the appearance of the experience is
sudden and unexpected as in Sasha’s article. My associative map also then “stole”
elements of experience from his like “locked in” and seeing others as Yidam.
The One Taste can be thought of as infinite dimensional or m » n experience of m
dimensions mapping down to n symbols in language. As you slowly grow the size of
the set of each row of symbols by associative memory or esoteric practice, the number
of different tasting symbols n decreases to 1 and then all of experience maps to One
Taste. This can be confused with pareidolia but pareidolia is like an incomplete
transition, maybe the sense of the unfolding hasn’t stabilized or viveka (discernment)
is not there to paint the light and shadow parts of the projection.
So I think there are pre-requisites for being able to steal fire:

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/how-prometheus-stole-fire-from-the

5/9

2/14/26, 11:31 AM

How Prometheus stole Fire from the Devas

No self. The ability to drop a rigid self image that allows you to temporarily
experience another point of view.
Impermanence. The understanding that all these experiences are impermanent is
a super power because it gives the yogi freedom to explore.
Vajra body or equanimity or sambhokaya. Some kind of secure feeling like a
protector or diamond body or indifference or enjoyment body allows you to take
any view without being afraid.
Access to the Space element / Rainbow body / Dharma Freedom King /
Shapeshifter. Some way to release your point of view and move to another point of
view and back again.
Belief in proximity. There is some quantization doing on in belief space because if
you are close enough to another belief it will just snap together.
Trust. A yogi once told me “just be sincere and honest”. I think practicing that
allows me to see other people as sincere and honest so I can learn stuff from any
being. A variant of beginners mind.
Discernment. A different form of viveka or discernment is something like how
transformers work. Portions of a text or what people are saying can be
“highlighted” by the intuitive faculty. Definitely not the linear this statement is
not true conceptual mind stuff. More embodied and autonomous.
Intuition. Hear the void pratibha / da’at / gnosis / para vak, some way your whole
body can communicate with you. Some way completely free of error that you trust
https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/how-prometheus-stole-fire-from-the

6/9

2/14/26, 11:31 AM

How Prometheus stole Fire from the Devas

totally. It’s just a channel so clear of projection you know intuitively you can trust
it. I am not sure how this comes about, I guess lots of dual realm discernment.
Unfortunately this and the above co-arise together so I have no idea how it
appeared for me.
Faith. You just have to trust the process and the process is good. So some
experience of the universe as the Ground of All Good (samantabadra), having done
the Bodhissatva vow and ended up in a co-operative universe, belief in some
Divine or Absolute principal that is supportive and has your back.
Once enough of the above are checked, then you should be able to copy fire from other
mystics safely using these mind tools. Normal people won’t understand it or be able to
experience it so it’s totally safe to just talk about it in plain sight. There is no secret in
the non duality it seems. Any mystic should be able to experience stuff just by a single
pointing out or two. There is so much open sourcing of these mind tools these days
there is no point going to secret esoteric texts. Any open source and vetted text will do
initially. I like the Mahayana ones like Lotus Sutra, Diamond Sutra, Heart Sutra etc. A
practice community is fun and also adds to the safety sensation but these days the
Buddha, Sangha and Dharma feel peer to peer and distributed rather than single
authority. A practice community is also self upgrading, so I am experimenting with
substack as one. Please post your favorite mind tools in the comments and I will see if
any resonate with me. I tend to like the all pervading bliss and emptiness flavors.

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/how-prometheus-stole-fire-from-the

7/9

2/14/26, 11:31 AM

How Prometheus stole Fire from the Devas

4 Likes

Discussion about this post
Comments

Restacks

Write a comment...

Taiji Taiji’s Substack Jan 5
Liked by Eigenhector

Suspect that the underlying root between all these mystic traditions and understanding resides in that
the metaphysics are all the same. I find it not too difficult to map these concepts for average people or
even rationalists if you have their language mapping and connect it with a few metaphysical rules.
LIKED (1)

REPLY

SHARE

1 reply by Eigenhector

1 more comment...

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/how-prometheus-stole-fire-from-the

8/9

2/14/26, 11:31 AM

How Prometheus stole Fire from the Devas

© 2026 Eigenhector · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice
Substack is the home for great culture

https://eigenhector.substack.com/p/how-prometheus-stole-fire-from-the

9/9

